Cape Town - Tokyo Sexwale has broken his silence on the 2010 Soccer World Cup bribery allegations against the wishes of
the South African government.
According to the BBC, Tokyo Sexwale says the allegations of corruption stemming from the US investigation are
"worrisome".
While the South African government has consistently denied all allegations of bribery, the former premier of Gauteng
has spoken out about troubling consequences for those who continue to deny any possibility of bribery in the build-up
to the 2010 World Cup.
The cash-for-votes controversy centres around a $10 million payment made to CONCACAF and the Caribbean Football Union
which was controlled at the time by Jack Warner, as part of the Diaspora Legacy Programme.
Sexwale, a member of both the 2010 World Cup bid team and 2010 Local Organising Committee, has now questioned the
claims that the payment was indeed a donation.
The former Human Settlements Minister questioned the whereabouts of the documents, invoices, budgets and end projects
left in place by the Diaspora Legacy Programme.
Sexwale added: "If they are not there, you are going to leave the FBI (US Federal Bureau of Investigation)
interpretation intact."
Sexwale name remains among the small list of individuals that could be one of the two South Africans allegedly involved
in paying bribes in order to secure the 2010 Soccer World Cup would be hosted in South Africa. Sexwale denied knowledge
or any involvement in any bribery.
Sexwale's interview with the BBC goes against the South African Sports and Recreation's minister plea that members
involved in the bidding process desist from making statements on the matter.
Mbalula said earlier: "As this is a matter of national importance, we call upon all who were involved in the process of
bidding and execution of the 2010 FIFA World Cup to desist from making statements and to afford the National Government
of the Republic of South Africa through the Ministry and Department of Sport and Recreation to handle this matter
through the diplomatic channels."
The BBC also stated that "the sports ministry did not respond over the weekend to phone and email requests for a
response to Mr Sexwale's comments".